
Bi-directional analog shaking table test on performance-enhanced recycled aggregate concrete frame structure model




 
© 2015, Editorial Office of China Civil Engineering Journal. All right reserved. According to the preliminary test results for the basic material properties and components of performance-enhanced recycled aggregate concrete (EC-RAC), a 1/4 scale frame structure model of three floors built from several types of recycled aggregate concretes was designed and manufactured. Then, the bi-directional analog shaking table test was carried out for the model to obtain the variation laws for natural frequency of vibration, damping ratio, structural vibration mode, acceleration response, displacement response and story drift. The results indicate that compared to the ordinary recycled aggregate concrete, EC-RAC can better control the occurrence and development of cracks, leading to the improved structural ductility and enhanced seismic performance of the entire structure. With the increase of seismic intensity, structural damage gradually accumulates, the natural frequency gradually descends, the damping ratio gradually ascends, the acceleration amplification factor gradually decreases, and the displacement amplitude gradually increases. Meanwhile, the curve pattern of displacement amplitude is similar to the first vibration mode of structure, indicating that the structure vibrates primarily in the first vibration mode. After experiencing various earthquake actions from frequently occurring seven-degree earthquake to rarely occurring eight-degree earthquake, the story drift does not exceed 1/50 of the stipulated value in specification[13]. The test results show that the designed RAC frame structure possesses a good seismic resistance and completely meet the requirements in specification[13]. Finally, with reference to The Building Grading Standards of Earthquake Damage, Code for Seismic Design of Buildings (GB 50011-2010) and other literature and with test phenomena in various stages taken into account, A 5-grade quantitative assessment criterion for post-earthquake damage of RAC structures, which can be applied to engineering practice, was established.


