
Neurofeedback Associated with Neurocognitive-Rehabilitation Training on Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)




 
© 2015 Springer Science+Business Media New York Neurofeedback is a computer-based behavior training gaining increasing interest in the treatment of children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), but is not a complete therapy for these patients. To meet the need for a more integrative approach, this study used neurofeedback with cognitive rehabilitation therapy as a more comprehensive approach for children with ADHD. Thirty children (females) were selected randomly from visitors of 5 clinics in Tehran city. Subjects were placed into 2 experimental groups and 1 control group. Groups were matched based on age, gender and socioeconomic status. One experimental group solely received neurofeedback in 10 sessions, the other experimental group received neurofeedback with cognitive rehabilitation therapy, and the control group left therapy received no therapy or left in the initial stages of therapy. Integrated visual and auditory test (IVA) was used pre-test and post-test to measure attention and impulsivity in children with ADHD, in addition to Neurocognitive Joyful Attentive Training Intervention (NEJATI). Data was analyzed using dependent T-test and analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). There are meaningful differences between all groups in attention and impulsivity factors. The group who received neurofeedback with cognitive rehabilitation therapy showed more improvement in attention and impulsivity factors compared to the group who received only neurofeedback and the control group with no treatment. There was also a significant difference between the solely neurofeedback group and control group in the attention factor. Neurofeedback is a facilitator therapy to improve the attention factor in children with ADHD, but is not a complete therapy due to its lack of support in performance factors. A complementary therapy such as cognitive rehabilitation therapy that focuses more on performance factors would be a more effective therapy as it leads to more positive effects on impulsivity and hyperactivity.


