
The ice water test and bladder cooling reflex: Physiology, pathophysiology and clinical importance | [Eiswassertest und Bladder-cooling-Reflex: Physiologie, Pathophysiologie und klinische Bedeutung]




 
© 2015 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg Background: Urodynamic studies are utilised for identification and follow-up of functional disorders of the lower urinary tract. Provocation tests are used to determine disorders which could not be revealed in standard cystometry. The ice water test is a simple test to identify neurogenic bladder dysfunction and to screen the integrity of the upper motor neuron in neurogenic bladder dysfunction. Objectives: Development and significance of the ice water test is presented in this review against the background of physiology and pathophysiology of the lower urinary tract. Materials and methods: A systematic review of PubMed and ScienceDirect databases was performed in April 2015. No language or time limitation was applied. The following key words and Medical Subject Heading terms were used to identify relevant studies: “ice water test”, “bladder cooling reflex”, “micturition” and “neuronal control”. Review articles and bibliographies of other relevant studies identified were hand searched to find additional studies. Results: The ice water test is performed by rapid instillation of 4–8 °C cold fluid into the urinary bladder. Hereby, afferent C fibers are activated by cold receptors in the bladder leading to the bladder cooling reflex. It is a spinal reflex which causes an involuntarily contraction of the urinary bladder. The test is normally positive in young infants during the first 4 years of life and become negative with maturation of the central nervous system afterwards by inhibition of the reflex. The damage of the upper motor neuron causes the recurrence of the reflex in the adulthood and indicates spinal and cerebral lesions. Discussion: The ice water test is utilised to identify lesions of the upper motor neuron. However, in the case of detrusor acontractility the test will always be negative and can not be utilized to distinguish between neurogenic or muscular causes. Furthermore, the test is also positive in a small percentage of cases of non-neurogenic diseases, e.g. in prostate-related bladder outlet obstruction or idiopathic overactive bladder. Although no clear explanation exists, a positive ice water test could be the first sign of an otherwise asymptomatic neurological disease. Conclusions: Due to the simple procedure, the ice water test is a reliable possibility to identify neurologic bladder hyperactivity subsequent to standard cystometry.


