
Premonitory Urges in Patients with Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome: An Italian Translation and a 7-Year Follow-up




 
© 2015 Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. Objective: Premonitory sensations or urges (PUs) are described as characteristic sensory phenomena preceding tics, which are often described as unpleasant. They occur in 90% of patients affected by Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome (GTS). They may be localized (around the area of tic) or generalized (covering a wide area of the body). The PUs can be measured by the Premonitory Urge for Tics Scale (PUTS). In this study we translated the PUTS scale into Italian and then assessed children and adolescents/young people (CYP) with GTS using the scale. Methods: GTS patients were assessed at the initial interview and after 7 years to evaluate the PUs, and the correlations of the PUTS scores with tic severity, severity of comorbid disorders (obsessive-compulsive disorder [OCD], attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD]), and a variety of coexisting psychopathologies. Results: A total of 95 patients were studied. We successfully translated the PUTS into Italian, and our results indicated that our translated version had good psychometric properties. Results demonstrated that the CYP had PUs at both interviews, but that older CYP were more consistent in reporting PUs than younger CYP (i.e., PUTS scores increased with age). We found no correlations between PUTS score and tic severity at either interview. We found a statistical significant correlation between PUTS score and obsessive-compulsive symptoms (OCS) at both interviews; Moreover both the PUTS and Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (CY-BOCS) scores increased significantly, whereas the Yale Global Tic Severity Rating Scale (YGTSS) score decreased significantly. We found no relationships between PUTS scores and anxiety, depression, ADHD, and externalizing/internalizing behavioral scores. Conclusions: Our results suggest the the Italian translation of the PUTS has good psychometric properties. Although both younger (<10 years of age) and older CYP (≤10 years of age) reported PUs, the scores at the initial interview were statistically significantly lower than at follow-up. Moreover, in CYP >10 years of age, the PUs correlated with obsessions and compulsions (CY-BOCS scores).


