
Influence of the EEG-Biofeedback training on selected cognitive functions in children with ADHD | [Wplyw treningu EEG-Biofeedback na wybrane funkcje poznawcze u dzieci z ADHD]




 
© Copyright 2015 Via Medica. Introduction: The Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) syndrome is one of the most frequent disorders diagnosed in child psychiatry. EEG-Biofeedback training is one of the methods supporting the therapy of children with ADHD. The EEG-Biofeedback training belongs to the range of psychological training techniques and improves the brain functions, cognitive functions in particular. Material and methods: The test was carried out on a group of 45 children with ADHD at the age of 11,6-12,9, 30 of which were referred to a tested group and the remaining 15 children were assigned to a control group. The examined group was subject to 15 sessions of EEG-Biofeedback trainings, twice a week. The control group was not subject to any psychological therapy for children with ADHD. In order to check the effectiveness of the training, the 2d test of attention by Rolf Brickenkamp was used as well as the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), used mainly for the short-Term memory testing. Results: The test results confirmed the thesis that the EEG-Biofeedback training improves the selected attention properties (mainly the ability to focus) and short-Term memory. It was proven that the degree of initial attention disorders suffered by children with ADHD, measured with the most important indications, has no significant influence on the degree of change (effectiveness of therapy) resulting from the participation in the EEG-Biofeedback training. It was also confirmed that sex, hand orientation and ADHD type do not affect the degree of the selected attention properties and short-Term memory of children who participated in the EEG-Biofeedback training sessions to a statistically significant degree. Conclusions: The EEG-Biofeedback training may be an effective method supporting the basic therapy of children suffering from ADHD.


