
Role of the cytoplasmic isoform of RBFOX1/A2BP1 in establishing the architecture of the developing cerebral cortex




 
© 2015 Hamada et al. Background: RBFOX1 (also known as FOX1 or A2BP1) regulates alternative splicing of a variety of transcripts crucial for neuronal functions. Physiological significance of RBFOX1 during brain development is seemingly essential since abnormalities in the gene cause autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and other neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders such as intellectual disability, epilepsy, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and schizophrenia. RBFOX1 was also shown to serve as a "hub" in ASD gene transcriptome network. However, the pathophysiological significance of RBFOX1 gene abnormalities remains to be clarified. Methods: To elucidate the pathophysiological relevance of Rbfox1, we performed a battery of in vivo and in vitro analyses of the brain-specific cytoplasmic isoform, Rbfox1-iso2, during mouse corticogenesis. In vivo analyses were based on in utero electroporation, and the role of Rbfox1-iso2 in cortical neuron migration, neurogenesis, and morphology was investigated by morphological methods including confocal laser microscope-assisted time-lapse imaging. In vitro analyses were carried out to examine the morphology of primary cultured mouse hippocampal neurons. Results: Silencing of Rbfox1-iso2 in utero caused defects in the radial migration and terminal translocation of cortical neurons during corticogenesis. Time-lapse imaging revealed that radial migration was apparently impaired by dysregulated nucleokinesis. Rbfox1-iso2 also regulated neuronal network formation in vivo since axon extension to the opposite hemisphere and dendritic arborization were hampered by the knockdown. In in vitro analyses, spine density and mature spine number were reduced in Rbfox1-iso2-deficient hippocampal neurons. Conclusions: Impaired Rbfox1-iso2 function was found to cause abnormal corticogenesis during brain development. The abnormal process may underlie the basic pathophysiology of ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders and may contribute to the emergence of the clinical symptoms of the patients with RBFOX1 gene abnormalities.


