
Explaining the variability of the photochemical reflectance index (PRI) at the canopy-scale: Disentangling the effects of phenological and physiological changes
	 




 
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Assessing photosynthesis rates at the ecosystem scale and over large regions is important for tracking the global carbon cycle and remote sensing has provided new and useful approaches for performing this assessment. The photochemical reflectance index (PRI) is a good estimator of short-term light-use efficiency (LUE) at the leaf scale; however, confounding factors appear at larger temporal and spatial scales. In this study, canopy-scale PRI variability was investigated for three species (Fagus sylvatica L., Quercus robur L. and Pinus sylvestris L.) growing under contrasting soil moisture conditions. Throughout the growing season, no significant differences in chlorophyll content and in violaxanthin, antheraxanthin and zeaxanthin were found between species or treatments. The daily PRI vs PAR (photosynthetically active radiation) relationships were determined using continuous measurements obtained at high frequency throughout the entire growing season, from early spring budburst to later autumn senescence, and were used to deconvolute the physiological PRI variability related to LUE variations due to phenological variability and related to temporal changes in the biochemical and structural canopy attributes. The PRI vs PAR relationship is used to show that the canopy-scale PRI measured at low radiation depends on the chlorophyll content of the canopy. The range of PRI variations at an intra-daily scale and the dynamics of the xanthophyll pool do not vary between days, which suggests that the PRI responds to a xanthophyll ratio. The PAR values at PRI saturation are mainly related to the canopy chlorophyll content during budburst and senescence and to the soil moisture content when the chlorophyll content is no longer a limiting factor. This parameter is significantly lower in the oak species that experience less stress from variations in soil moisture and is species dependant. These results provide new insights regarding the analysis and the meaning of PRI variability as a proxy for LUE at the canopy scale.


