
Chloroplastic thioredoxin m functions as a major regulator of Calvin cycle enzymes during photosynthesis in vivo




 
© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal published by Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Thioredoxins (Trxs) regulate the activity of various chloroplastic proteins in a light-dependent manner. Five types of Trxs function in different physiological processes in the chloroplast of Arabidopsis thaliana. Previous in vitro experiments have suggested that the f-type Trx (Trx f) is the main redox regulator of chloroplast enzymes, including Calvin cycle enzymes. To investigate the in vivo contribution of each Trx isoform to the redox regulatory system, we first quantified the protein concentration of each Trx isoform in the chloroplast stroma. The m-type Trx (Trx m), which consists of four isoforms, was the most abundant type. Next, we analyzed several Arabidopsis Trx-m-deficient mutants to elucidate the physiological role of Trx m in vivo. Deficiency of Trx m impaired plant growth and decreased the CO2 assimilation rate. We also determined the redox state of Trx target enzymes to examine their photo-reduction, which is essential for enzyme activation. In the Trx-m-deficient mutants, the reduction level of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase was lower than that in the wild type. Inconsistently with the historical view, our in vivo study suggested that Trx m plays a more important role than Trx f in the activation of Calvin cycle enzymes. Significance Statement Thioredoxins regulate the activity of chloroplast enzymes by reducing disulfide bonds in a light-dependent manner. Previous in vitro studies indicated that f-type thioredoxins are the most efficient redox regulators; however, f-type thioredoxin mutants did not show any obvious phenotypes. Here, we used in vivo studies to show that the more abundant m-type thioredoxins are more important regulators of Calvin Cycle enzymes. These results highlight the need for in vivo studies.


