
Salt tolerance and alterations in cytosine methylation in the interspecific hybrids of Fraxinus velutina and Fraxinus mandshurica




 
© 2015, Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht. For cross-pollination trees, the optimal breeding method is hybridization. Tree heterosis is commonly present and is the main research focus in tree crossbreeding. Salt stress and interspecific hybridization may lead to DNA methylation changes. The study crossed Fraxinus mandshurica (female parent) with Fraxinus velutina (male parent) to obtain interspecific F1 hybrid progenies that could obtain the good characters of parents. The results showed that growth and survival rate of the interspecific hybrid progenies (F1 hybrids of F. mandshurica × F. velutina) were significantly higher than those of intraspecific open pollinated plants from parental F. mandshurica and F. velutina. Salt tolerance and cytosine methylation in interspecific F1 hybrids and the intraspecific open pollinated plants from parents were examined. Membrane permeability, ROS and antioxidant activity, malondialdehyde, and photosynthesis were measured after salt treatment and genomic methylation was analyzed using a methylation-sensitive amplified polymorphism protocol. F1 hybrids exhibited heterosis for growth in normal as well as high salt conditions. DNA methylation in the F1 hybrids was lower than the intraspecific open pollinated plants from parents. Salt treatments changed DNA methylation patterns in F1 hybrids. Genomic DNA of the intraspecific open pollinated plants from parents had internal cytosine methylation (average of 13.22 %), whereas F1 hybrid seedlings had external cytosine methylation (average of 7.34 %). Such changes in DNA methylation patterns in F1 hybrids suggest a connection between salt tolerance and epigenetic mechanisms in plants. We observed that alteration of DNA methylation was closely correlated with the adaptation to the salt stress and provided epigenetic mechanisms of salt tolerance in the interspecific hybridization of trees.


