
Spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.) modulates its proteome differentially in response to salinity, cadmium and their combination stress




 
© 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. Cadmium (Cd) contamination and salinity are common stressors in agricultural soils all over the globe. Sensitivity and modulation of plant proteome lead to proper signal execution and adaptation to abiotic stress via molecular responses, which strengthen plant defence system. A comparative proteomic study, employing 2DE-MALDI TOF/TOF MS, of Spinacia oleracea plants exposed to cadmium (50 μg CdCl2 g-1 soil), salinity (10 mg NaCl g-1 soil) and their combination (NaCl + Cd) was conducted to understand the minimum common adaptation to multiple stress. Analysis of 2D gel maps showed significant increase and decrease in relative abundance of 14 and 39 proteins by Cd; 11 and 46 by salinity and 22 and 37 by combined stress of Cd and salinity, respectively. Peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) helped in the identification of maturase K and PPD4 with increased relative abundance under all stresses; whereas salinity stress and combination stress silenced the presence of one protein (polycomb protein EZ2) and two proteins (cellulose synthase-like protein and ubiquitin conjugation factor E4), respectively. The identified proteins were functionally associated with signal transduction (15%), protein synthesis (16%), stress response and defence (33%), photosynthesis (13%), plant growth/cell division (9%), energy generation (4%), transport (4%), secondary metabolism (3%), and cell death (3%); clearly indicating the importance and necessity of keeping a higher ratio of defence and disease-responsive proteins. The results suggest that plant may increase the abundance of defence proteins and may also lower the abundance of catabolic proteins. Proteins with altered ratios of abundance belonged to different functional categories, suggesting that plants have differential mechanisms to respond to Cd, salinity, and their combined stress, but with unique sets of proteins.


