
Identification of four functionally important microRNA families with contrasting differential expression profiles between drought-tolerant and susceptible rice leaf at vegetative stage




 
© 2015 Cheah et al. Background: Developing drought-tolerant rice varieties with higher yield under water stressed conditions provides a viable solution to serious yield-reduction impact of drought. Understanding the molecular regulation of this polygenic trait is crucial for the eventual success of rice molecular breeding programmes. microRNAs have received tremendous attention recently due to its importance in negative regulation. In plants, apart from regulating developmental and physiological processes, microRNAs have also been associated with different biotic and abiotic stresses. Hence here we chose to analyze the differential expression profiles of microRNAs in three drought treated rice varieties: Vandana (drought-tolerant), Aday Sel (drought-tolerant) and IR64 (drought-susceptible) in greenhouse conditions via high-throughput sequencing. Results: Twenty-six novel microRNA candidates involved in the regulation of diverse biological processes were identified based on the detection of miRNA*. Out of their 110 predicted targets, we confirmed 16 targets from 5 novel microRNA candidates. In the differential expression analysis, mature microRNA members from 49 families of known Oryza sativa microRNA were differentially expressed in leaf and stem respectively with over 28 families having at least a similar mature microRNA member commonly found to be differentially expressed between both tissues. Via the sequence profiling data of leaf samples, we identified osa-miR397a/b, osa-miR398b, osa-miR408-5p and osa-miR528-5p as being down-regulated in two drought-tolerant rice varieties and up-regulated in the drought-susceptible variety. These microRNAs are known to be involved in regulating starch metabolism, antioxidant defence, respiration and photosynthesis. A wide range of biological processes were found to be regulated by the target genes of all the identified differentially expressed microRNAs between both tissues, namely root development (5.3-5.7 %), cell transport (13.2-18.4 %), response to stress (10.5-11.3 %), lignin catabolic process (3.8-5.3 %), metabolic processes (32.1-39.5 %), oxidation-reduction process (9.4-13.2 %) and DNA replication (5.7-7.9 %). The predicted target genes of osa-miR166e-3p, osa-miR166h-5p*, osa-miR169r-3p* and osa-miR397a/b were found to be annotated to several of the aforementioned biological processes. Conclusions: The experimental design of this study, which features rice varieties with different drought tolerance and tissue specificity (leaf and stem), has provided new microRNA profiling information. The potentially regulatory importance of the microRNA genes mentioned above and their target genes would require further functional analyses.


