
Growth, photosynthetic and physiological responses of Torreya grandis seedlings to varied light environments




 
© 2015, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. Key message: Shading could improve plant growth in Torreya grandis seedling, and 75 % shade is likely the optimum light irradiance level for its growth. Abstract: Light is a critical factor that affects the survival and early growth of tree seedlings. Torreya grandis, an economically important subtropical plant, is a shade-preferring species; however, the optimum light intensity for the growth of this species was still unclear. To determine the optimum light intensity, we examined the growth, chlorophyll fluorescence, gas exchange, and chloroplast ultrastructure of T. grandis seedlings growing under four levels of shade (i.e., 0, 50, 75, and 90 %). The results showed that T. grandis attained the greatest Pn and biomass when cultivated with 75 % shade. Seedlings grown under 75 % shade exhibited a 155 % increase in the height increment, a 440 % increase in the diameter increment, a 42.2 % increase in biomass, and a 102 % increase in the photosynthetic rate compared with seedlings grown in full sun. Moreover, 75 % shaded plants had the lowest antioxidant enzyme activities, malondialdehyde content and ion leakage. Full sunlight and 50 % shade significantly reduced the growth of T. grandis which was associated with a decrease in the maximal photochemical efficiency, photosynthetic rate, chlorophyll content and biomass compared with those under 75 % shade. Compared with the 75 % shaded plants, seedlings grown under 90 % shade had a reduced photosynthetic rate, which was accompanied by increased malondialdehyde content, relative electrolyte conductivity and antioxidant enzymes activities, suggesting that seedlings under the 90 % shade had the lower energy utilizing capacity. Higher antioxidant enzyme activities might be an efficient adaptation to protection against oxidative stress under low light conditions. Therefore, our results indicate that 75 % shade is likely the optimum light irradiance level for T. grandis seedling growth.


