
Solvation studies of aqueous Mono ammonium phosphate solution at different temperatures




 
Phosphorus is essential to all known life forms because it is a key element in many physiological and biochemical process. Phosphorous availability is crucial for the establishment of root system at the beginning of growing season. Phosphorous containing compounds are essential for photosynthesis in plants, for energy transformations and for the activity of some hormones in plants. Mono ammonium phosphate is a fully water soluble fertilizer, a highly efficient source of phosphorous and nitrogen for plants. The ultrasonic velocity measurements are helpful to study the solute-solvent interaction in aqueous and non-Aqueous solutions. In this present investigation, ultrasonic velocity, density and viscosity of aqueous fertilizer solution of mono ammonium phosphate were measured at various temperatures from 303°K to 323°K. The molal hydration number (nh), molar hydration number (nh'), apparent molal volume (φv), apparent molal compressibility (φk), and molar solvated volume (φs) were determined using the measured values. The results have been explained on the basis of molecular interactions occurring in the solutions. These molecular interactions exist between the ions in solutions help in understanding the nature of solute and solvent (i.e.) whether the solute modifies or distorts the structure of the solvent. Apparent molal volume and apparent molal compressibility have been proven to be a very useful tool in elucidating the structural interactions occurring in solution. Appreciable negative values of φk at all temperatures suggest the presence of ion-solvent interaction. Positive values of hydration number indicate an appreciable solvation of solute. This result provides an added support for the structure breaking nature of the solute, of which it is evident that the MAP is completely dissolved in water and it can be easily penetrate into the soil. Hence the plants can absorb the nutrients phosphorous supplied by the fertilizer MAP and the growth of the plants may be enhanced.


