
Responses of Clonal growth and photosynthesis in Amomum villosum to different light environment




 
© 2016 The Institute of Experimental Botany Clonal growth is of great importance for the survival, growth, expansion, and resource utilization of some species. Knowing how clonal plants respond morphologically and physiologically to different light environment can be useful to explain their occurrence and abundance patterns under specific environmental conditions. Responses of clonal growth, leaf gas exchange, fluorescence emission, and photosynthetic pigment concentrations to different light environments (100%, 60%, 30%, and 15%) were studied in Amomum villosum, grown in the traditional way for economic purpose in Xishuangbanna, southwest China. The results showed that A. villosum attained vigorous clonal growth under 30% and 60% light, with a higher plant height, number of ramets, stolon length, thicker stems and stolons. Shade-grown A. villosum possessed a larger leaf area than that of the sun-grown plants in order to capture more light. For A. villosum, the higher light-saturated net photosynthetic rate, light saturation point, larger fresh and dry biomass can explained the better clonal growth for A. villosum under 30% and 60% light. A. villosum attained the highest values of minimal chlorophyll fluorescence under 100% light and the lowest values of maximum photochemical efficiency of PSII under 15% light. These findings indicated that the irradiance was too strong for A. villosum growing under full light and too weak for plants growing under 15% light. It was also verified by higher concentrations of photosynthetic pigments in the shaded plants compared to those grown under full sun light. Our results suggested that A. villosum appeared to be adapted to moderate light environment (60%–30%) indicated by vigorous clonal growth and higher photosynthesis. This information is very useful to select clonal species for rainforest or understory projects. The cultivation of A. villosum in the rainforest should not be done under too strong (100%) or too weak light environment (less than 15%).


