
Growth, photosynthetic and antioxidant parameters of two lettuce cultivars as affected by red, green, and blue light-emitting diodes




 
© 2015, Korean Society for Horticultural Science and Springer-Verlag GmbH. The addition of green light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to a combination of red and blue LEDs, which promote photosynthesis and growth in plants, is known to enhance plant growth in closed-type plant production systems. However, there is limited information on the effects of supplementary green light. This study aimed to determine the effect of red (R), green (G), and blue (B) LED ratios on the growth, photosynthetic, and antioxidant parameters in two lettuce (Lactuca sativa) cultivars, red leaf ‘Sunmang’ and green leaf ‘Grand Rapid TBR’. The seedlings were grown for 18 days and then cultivated in growth chambers equipped with LED lighting systems for 4 weeks. Combinations of six LED lighting sources (R:B = 9:1, 8:2, 7:3; R:G:B = 9:1:0, 8:1:1, 7:1:2) were manufactured to emit red (655 nm), blue (456 nm), or green (518 nm) lights under photosynthetic photon flux density of 173 ± 3 μmol·m-2·s-1. Red LEDs were found to improve growth characteristics such as fresh and dry weights of shoots and roots, and leaf area in combination with blue LEDs. The substitution of blue with green LEDs in the presence of a fixed proportion of red LEDs enhanced the growth of lettuce. In particular, the fresh weights of red leaf lettuce shoots under R8G1B1 were about 61% higher than those under R8B2. Furthermore, analysis of leaf morphology, transmittance, cell division rate, and leaf anatomy under treatments with green LEDs supported the enhanced growth of the two lettuce cultivars tested. Meanwhile, growth under blue LEDs led to the accumulation of antioxidant parameters in ‘Sunmang’. Thus, the results of this study suggest that the percentage of red, green, and blue LEDs is an important factor for the growth, development, and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in plants and especially the supplemental irradiation of green LEDs based on the combination of red and blue LEDs can improve lettuce growth.


