
Entransia and Hormidiella, sister lineages of Klebsormidium (Streptophyta), respond differently to light, temperature, and desiccation stress




 
© 2015 The Author(s) The green-algal class Klebsormidiophyceae (Streptophyta), which occurs worldwide, comprises the genera Klebsormidium, Interfilum, Entransia, and Hormidiella. Ecophysiological research has so far focused on the first two genera because they are abundant in biological soil crust communities. The present study investigated the photosynthetic performances of Hormidiella attenuata and two strains of Entransia fimbriata under light, temperature, and desiccation stress. Their ultrastructure was compared using transmission electron microscopy. The two Entransia strains showed similar physiological responses. They used light more efficiently than Hormidiella, as indicated by higher oxygen production and relative electron transport rate under low light conditions, lower light saturation and compensation points, and higher maximum oxygen production during light saturation. Their requirement for low light levels explains the restriction of Entransia to dim limnetic habitats. In contrast, Hormidiella, which prefers drier soil habitats, responded to light gradients similarly to other aero-terrestrial green algae. Compared to Entransia, Hormidiella was less affected by short-term desiccation, and rehydration allowed full recovery of the photosynthetic performance. Nevertheless, both strains of Entransia coped with low water availability better than other freshwater algae. Photosynthetic oxygen production in relation to respiratory consumption was higher in low temperatures (Entransia: 5 °C, Hormidiella: 10 °C) and the ratio decreased with increasing temperatures. Hormidiella exhibited conspicuous triangular spaces in the cell wall corners, which were filled either with undulating cell wall material or with various inclusions. These structures are commonly seen in various members of Klebsormidiophyceae. The data revealed significant differences between Hormidiella and Entransia, but appropriate adaptations to their respective habitats.


