
Influence of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and treated wastewater on water relations and leaf structure alterations of Viburnum tinus L. plants during both saline and recovery periods




 
© 2015 Elsevier GmbH. Nowadays, irrigation with low quality water is becoming an alternative to satisfy the needs of crops. However, some plant species have to deal with high salinity of reclaimed water, by adapting their physiological behaviour during both saline and recovery periods and developing morphological changes in their leaves. The application of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) could also be a suitable option to mitigate the negative effects of this kind of water, although the effectiveness of plant-AMF association is influenced by many factors. In this work, during forty weeks, the combined effect of Glomus iranicum var. tenuihypharum and two types of water: control, C, EC<0.9dSm-1 and reclaimed water, RW (with EC: 4dSm-1 during a first saline period and EC: 6dSm-1 during a second saline period) was evaluated for laurustinus plants (Viburnum tinus L.) transplanted in soil. This was followed by a recovery period of eight weeks, when all the plants were irrigated in the control irrigation conditions. Seasonal and daily changes in stem water potential (Ψstem), stomatal conductance (gs), photosynthesis (Pn) and leaf internal CO2 concentration (Ci) of laurustinus plants were evaluated. Leaf structure alterations, nutrient imbalance, height and leaf hydraulic conductivity (Kleaf) were also determined. Due to the high difficulty of absorbing water from the soil, RW plants showed a high volumetric water content (θv) in soil. The stem water potential and the stomatal conductance (gs) values were reduced in RW plants throughout the second saline period. These decreases were also found during the day. Leaf Ca2+/Na+ and K+/Na+ ratios diminished in RW plants respect to the C plants due to the Na+ accumulation, although height and chlorophyll content values did not show statistical differences. Leaves from RW plants showed a significantly thicker mesophyll than Control leaves as a consequence of high EC. The area of palisade parenchyma (PP) increased while the area of spongy parenchyma (SP) decreased in RW leaves with respect to the C leaves. These structural changes could be considered as a strategy to maximize photosynthesis potential in saline conditions. Mycorrhizal inoculation improved the water status of both C and RW plants by increasing their Ψstem and gs values. As regards leaf structure, AMF showed an opposite effect to salinity for PP and SP. At the end of the recovery period, hardly any statistical differences of physiological parameters were found between treatments, although a tendency to improve them was observed in inoculated plants. In any case, the leaf structural changes and the great reduction in Kleaf observed at Ψleaf below -1.5MPa would constitute an important mechanism for laurustinus plants to reduce the water loses produced by salinity.


