
Fast macromolecular proton fraction mapping of the human liver in vivo for quantitative assessment of hepatic fibrosis




 
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. The macromolecular proton fraction (MPF) is a quantitative MRI parameter determining the magnetization transfer (MT) effect in tissues, and is defined as the relative amount of immobile macromolecular protons involved in magnetization exchange with mobile water protons. MPF has the potential to provide a quantitative assessment of fibrous tissue because of the intrinsically high MPF specific for collagen. The goal of this study was to investigate the relationship between histologically determined fibrosis stage and MPF in the liver parenchyma measured using a recently developed fast single-point clinically targeted MPF mapping method. Optimal saturation parameters for single-point liver MPF measurements were determined from the analysis of liver Z spectra in vivo based on the error propagation model. Sixteen patients with chronic hepatitis C viral infection underwent 3-T MRI using an optimized liver MPF mapping protocol. Fourteen patients had prior liver biopsy with histologically staged fibrosis (METAVIR scores F0-F3) and two patients had clinically diagnosed cirrhosis (score F4 was assigned). The protocol included four breath-hold three-dimensional scans with 2×3×6-mm3 resolution and 10 transverse sections: dynamic acquisition of MT-weighted and reference images; dynamic acquisition of three images for variable flip angle T1 mapping; dual-echo B0 map and actual flip angle imaging B1 map. The average liver MPF was determined as the mode of the MPF histograms. MPF was significantly increased in patients with clinically significant fibrosis (scores F2-F4, n=6) relative to patients with no or mild fibrosis (scores F0-F1, n=10): 6.49±0.36% versus 5.94±0.26%, p<0.01 (Mann-Whitney test). MPF and fibrosis scores were strongly positively correlated, with a Spearman's rank correlation coefficient of 0.80 (p<0.001). This study demonstrates the feasibility of fast MPF mapping of the human liver in vivo and confirms the hypothesis that MPF is increased in hepatic fibrosis and associated with fibrosis stage. MPF may be useful as a non-invasive imaging biomarker of hepatic fibrosis.


