
Physico-chemical characterization of asolectin-genistein liposomal system: An approach to analyze its in vitro antioxidant potential and effect in glioma cells viability




 
© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. In this study, the interaction between soy isoflavone genistein and asolectin liposomes was investigated by monitoring the effects of isoflavone on lipidic hydration, mobility, location and order. These properties were analyzed by the following techniques: horizontal attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (HATR-FTIR), low-field 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), high-field 31P NMR, zeta potential, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and UV-vis spectroscopy. The antioxidant and antitumoral activities of the genistein liposomal system were also studied. The genistein saturation concentration in ASO liposomes corresponded to 484 μM. HATR-FTIR results indicated that genistein influences the dynamics of the lipidic phosphate, choline, carbonyl and acyl chain methylenes groups. At the lipid polar head, HATR-FTIR and 31P NMR results showed that the isoflavone reduces the hydration degree of the phosphate group, as well as its mobility. Genistein ordered the lipid interfacial carbonyl group, as evidenced by the HATR-FTIR bandwidth analysis. This ordering effect was also observed in the lipidic hydrophobic region, by HATR-FTIR, NMR, DSC and turbidity responses. At the saturation concentration, liposome-loaded genistein inhibits the lipid peroxidation induced by hydroxyl radical in 90.9%. ASO liposome-loaded genistein at 100 μM decreased C6 glioma cell viability by 57% after 72 h of treatment. Results showed an increase of the genistein in vitro activities after its incorporation in liposomes. The data described in this work will contribute to a better understanding of the interaction between genistein and a natural-source membrane and of its influence on isoflavone biological activities. Furthermore, the antitumoral results showed that genistein-based liposomes, which contain natural-sourced lipids, may be promising as a drug delivery system to be used in the glioma therapy.


