
Basement structure of southern Yunnan and adjacent areas: The Zhenkang-Luxi deep seismic sounding profile




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. Yunnan province, located in the southern section of the North-South seismic (SSNSS) belt, is one of the areas with most active seismicity in China mainland, where frequent earthquakes have occurred in recent years. Observations and research in this region are of important significance to understand interaction of plates and geodynamic background. Under the support of the seismic industry special project of China Earthquake Administration (CEA) “China Earthquake Scientific Array Detection-SSNSS”, a nearly EW-trending deep seismic wide-angle reflection/refraction profile was deployed along Zhenkang-Luxi by Geophysical Exploration Center of CEA at the end of 2011. This profile crosses through a number of major tectonic units (such as the Sanjiang fold system, Yangzi platform and South China block) and a series of seismic belts (e.g., the Nanting river fault, Lancangjiang fault, Red River fault and Xiaojiang fault etc.). The length of this profile is 600 km, and the numbers of shots and three-component seismometers are 11 and 400, respectively. In this paper, the finite difference and time-terms methods are used to process the first arrival times for 11 shots of this profile, and the basement velocity structure in this area is obtained. The results show that the shape of basement interface of different tectonic units changes dramatically, with depths ranging from 1.0 km to 7.0 km. The deepest point of the basement is about 7.0 km in the Sanjiang fold system, while the basement is as shallow as about 1.0 km in the Zuogong-Gengma fold system. In the Yangzi block, the basement depth becomes shallow slowly, which is about 5.0 km on average. The eastern segment of this profile is the South China block, where the basement depth shallows rapidly, even exposes on the surface. The lateral velocity heterogeneity is obvious along this profile, and the location of velocity contours with drastic change is consistent with the fault distribution in this area. The surface velocity is relatively high, about 5.2 km·s-1, in the South China block, and down to 4.3 km·s-1 and 4.5 km·s-1 in the Sanjiang fold system and Yangzi platform, respectively, while increasing to 4.6 km·s-1 in the Zuogong-Gengma fold system. Normally, the velocity change is obvious in the vicinity of fault zones, especially showing obvious differences on the basement interfere and both sides of the Red River fault zone, which is clear in the record section of Pg waves. Generally, the stress is easy to accumulate and release at the place where basement interfere and velocity contours change dramatically, and active faults cross each other. Therefore, the frequent earthquakes in this area are closely related to the distribution of these faults. These results are consistent with previous work, and provide a scientific basis for the further research on the background of strong earthquakes and its deep dynamic significance in this region.


