
Phase velocity maps of Rayleigh waves in the southeast Tibetan plateau




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. The southeast Tibetan plateau is located in the transition zone between the uplift plateau and the stable Yangtze block. Many volcanoes, deep and huge faults, strong earthquakes are developed in this region. The crustal and upper mantle structure is very complex here. Investigating the detail velocity structure beneath this region is very important when studying the deformation mechanism of intra-plate volcano, the seismicity in the Yunnan-Sichuan area, the breeding environment of strong earthquakes and the dynamics of Tibet plateau uplift. The ballistic surface wave tomography is a classic method of studying the crustal and upper mantle structure. By collecting the vertical component of teleseismic data recorded by 325 broadband stations of the portable seismic array under the project “China Seismic Array-Phase 1” during Aug. 2011 and Sep. 2012, a total number of 3594 inter-station phase velocity dispersion curves of Rayleigh waves were determined by a frequency-time analysis method based on a continuous wavelet transform. In addition, all of dispersion curves were arranged into a tomographic inversion scheme, called Ditmar & Yanovskaya, to obtain the phase velocity maps ranging from 10 s to 60 s in the southeast Tibetan plateau. The spatial resolution maps show that the lateral resolution is about 50 km. Our tomographic results reveal that the S-wave structure of the crust and upper mantle beneath the SE Tibet is obviously laterally heterogeneous. At short periods (e.g., 10 s), the distribution of phase velocity has good relationship with the sediment layer thickness on the surface. Most of strong earthquakes occurred in low-speed regions or the evident gradient belts where the velocities change from high to low values on the map of 15 s, revealing that the strong earthquakes are directly related to the velocity structure of middle and upper crust. At the intermediate periods (e.g., 20 s, 30 s), the distribution of phase velocity is related well with the crustal thickness. The obvious low-speed zone imaged beneath the Xiaojiang fault and Songpan-Ganzi block on the maps of intermediate periods may reveal there are low-velocity layers in the middle-lower crust which are also found by previous studies. At the longer periods (e.g., 40 s, 60 s), the distribution of phase velocity is related well with the thermal structure and tectonic activity (e.g. magmatic activity) in the upper mantle. A large low-velocity zone is imaged in west Yunnan province, indicating partial melts might exist in the upper mantle beneath this area. It has different velocity characteristics on the phase velocity maps beneath different tectonic units. It is common that low-velocity zones between 10 s and 60 s are present beneath the Tengchong volcano, especially, it is much slower for the phase velocity speeding up as periods increasing after 40 s, and it becomes the lowest velocity zone for the Tengchong volcano than any other blocks, indicating that the low-velocity layer may extend down to the upper mantle (~100 km) at least beneath the Tengchong volcano.


