
Mutli-stage structural evolution of intracontinental Daloushan basin- mountain system, upper Yangtze Block: implications for a coupling of deformation events across South China plate and its periphery




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. Mountain building processes of intracontinental basin-mountain system record deformation from the stress of continental collision at both plate margins and within continental interiors, which shows a coupling relationship with uplift and exhumation, sedimentary deposits etc. The Daloushan intraplate basin-mountain system lies at the southern margin of the Sichuan basin that is situated in upper Yangtze Block, and the southeastern margin of the Tibetan Plateau. The Daloushan strikes nearly E-W with ~250 km in length and 80 km in width, and a gradual topography changing from mountain to basin. The gentle Daloushan fold belt is of Jura-style with shorten distance of 12-20 km. In this study, layer-parallel shortening, multi-stage structural data and fault-slip analysis are used to decipher the deformational characteristics and evolution of the Daloushan basin-mountain system. The results suggest that four stages of deformation occurred across the Daloushan during Late-Mesozoic to Cenozoic, which is simultaneous with the multi-stage collision and deformation both in the plate margin and the interior of the South China plate. The first two phases of compressional, approximately E-W and S-N oriented shortening events (D1 and D2) generated sets of layer-parallel shortening structures and multistage conjugate joint sets. These sets formed by the NW-ward diachronous thrusting of the Xuefeng Orogen related to far-ﬁeld effects of distal flat-slab subduction of the Pacific plate under the South China plate during Early-Late Cretaceous and Late Cretaceous (~80 Ma). Then, the third phase of NE-SW oriented (D3) and the NW-SE oriented (D4) shortening deformation occurred during Late Paleogene (40-20 Ma) and Late Cenozoic (10-5 Ma), respectively, as far-ﬁeld effects of India-Asian continental collision. Thus, we suggest that an intracontinental transfer of Paleo-Pacific Tectonic Domain to Tethys-Himalayan Domain occurred here during Late-Cretaceous to Early Cenozoic (D2 to D3).


