
Collision-related Early Paleozoic evolution of a crustal fragment from the northern Gondwana margin (Slavonian Mountains, Tisia Mega-Unit, Croatia): Reconstruction of the P-T path, timing and paleotectonic implications




 
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. An orthogneiss from the oldest metamorphic complex at Mt. Papuk (Tisia Mega-Unit, Croatia) enables the quantification of the P-T evolution of Early Paleozoic rocks of the Panonian Basin basement in contrast to neighboring peri-Gondwanan terrains which are significantly overprinted by pre-Variscan, Variscan, and Alpine events. Two different groups of Ce-rich monazite within oval-shaped corona microstructures have been observed. Age dating of the corona cores yielded two populations with average ages of 528 ± 7 (2σ) Ma and 465 ± 7 Ma, respectively. Furthermore, an Y-rich group, found inside garnet cores, was dated at 616 ± 23. Ma. Th-rich monazite included in garnet rims yielded an age of 491 ± 6. Ma. The youngest monazite group at 417 ± 20. Ma is located inside mica. The orthogneiss precursor was a calc-alkaline to high-K calc-alkaline igneous peraluminous crustal rock (diorite) from an active continental marginal setting. The calculated P-T pseudosection in the MnNCKFMASHTO system in combination with assemblage characteristics and mineral chemistry data provides good constraints on the P-T evolution: for stage I peak P-T conditions of 13 kbar and 670 °C were derived followed by stage II, which was characterized by moderate cooling accompanied by uplift to mid-crustal levels (5.2 kbar and 610 °C). Subsequently, the system cooled to 480 °C at ~ 4.4 kbar (stage III). Formation of titanite rims on ilmenite suggests further cooling to 4 kbar and 400 °C (stage IV). The clockwise P-T path implies exhumation from a tectonically thickened crustal setting (ca. 45 km depth at a geothermal gradient of ~ 15 °C/km) to mid-crustal levels (ca. 18 km) followed by cooling at depths < 14 km. Crustal thickening was due to the collision of a continental plate (Gondwana) with a smaller plate, which was underthrust.


