
Tectonic and sedimentary architecture of the Karukéra spur: A record of the Lesser Antilles fore-arc deformations since the Neogene




 
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. The Karukéra spur is an easternmost submerged rise of the Lesser Antilles fore-arc in the Guadeloupe archipelago, culminating about 4000m above the fore-arc basin 150km west of the deformation front. The analysis of 3500km 2D high-resolution multichannel seismic reflection and multibeam bathymetric data, and the study of 14 core samples, allow for the first time to reconstruct its sedimentary anatomy and tectonic evolution. Seven seismic units (US1 to US7) are evidenced, organised into four major depositional sequences separated by erosional surfaces. Units US1 to US4 thicken to the south-southeast on the spur. The sedimentary deposits rest upon a deeply eroded metamorphic basement of the Caribbean Plate as in La Désirade Island. Sequence 1 (units US1 and US2) remains unknown in its lower part because it does not outcrop. Its upper part comprises early Miocene shallow water carbonates. Sequence S2 (Unit US3) only comprises an upper Miocene transgressive systems tract deposited into basinal environment. It is bounded by major erosional surfaces SB2 and SB3. Sequence 3 (US4 to US6) is Zanclean to Pleistocene. It is dominantly composed of shallow water, reefal deposits. Sequence 4 corresponds to recent deposits. The Karukéra spur experienced three main extensional episodes with alternations between uplift and subsidence periods. Uplifts are responsible for emersions and erosions. Subsidence severely drowned shallow water deposits. The first extensional episode led to the formation of horsts and grabens in the basement, prior to early Miocene deposits. The second extensional episode occurred during upper Miocene, in accordance with data in surrounding islands. The third tectonic episode developed since Calabrian. Noticeable is the constant reactivation of N130°-N150°, N150°-N180° and N40° trending faults since early Miocene and the neoformation of E-W trending faults since Calabrian. Our results suggest that at the latitude of Guadeloupean archipelago the Lesser Antilles subduction zone is an erosional margin because of the successive sweepings of the Santa Lucia then Tiburon Ridges.


