
Stress influence of the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence on Chinese mainland




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. Based on the rupture models of the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence and half space homogeneous elastic model, the Coulomb stress changes are calculated on nodal planes and slip directions of the Tingri and Nyalam earthquakes which occurred in Tibet, China. The results show that the Coulomb stresses on the Tingri and Nyalam earthquakes transferred by the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence are (2~3)×103 Pa and (2.4~3.1)×105 Pa, respectively. It implies that the Tingri and Nyalam earthquakes are triggered by the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence. Then, we projected the stress changes generated by the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence on the fault planes and slip directions of the active faults near the source region and in Chinese mainland. The Coulomb stress largely increases on the Himalayan main frontal thrust fault and the extensional normal faults in the interior of the Tibet plateau, such as the Kyêbxang Co-Xainza-Dinggyê fault zone, the fault zone of the southeast foot of the Nyaiqêntanglha Mountains, the Yibug Caka-Dawa Co-Gyêsar Co fault zone, the Cam Co-Palung Co fault zone. While it decreases on the strike-slip faults in Tibet plateau, such as the Altyn Tagh fault, the East Kunlun fault, the Yushu-Maqu fault, west of the Pangong Tso fault, the Lhari fault. The Coulomb stress also decreases on the faults on the north and south side of the Tienshan Mountains. Little Coulomb stress changes appear on the faults in northern Xinjiang, North China, Northeast China and South China. Lastly, we calculated horizontal stress changes generated by the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence. The horizontal area stress increases in the north direction of the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence (most of the Tibet plateau and Xinjiang region), and decreases in southern Tibet to the east side of the earthquake sequence and south part of the Sichuan-Yunnan region. Little horizontal area stress increase took place in North China and Northeast China. Little horizontal area stress decreases are seen in South China. The principal compressive stress shows an outward radiation centered on the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence with the principal extensional stress along the direction of concentric circles in western China. The principal compressive stress shows NE direction in Northeast China, NEE in North China and SEE in South China, respectively. The direction of the horizontal stress change generated by the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence presents a similar pattern of the contemporary stress field, which means that collision between the India and Eurasia plates associated with the 2015 Nepal earthquake sequence is the major dynamic source for tectonic deformation in Chinese mainland.


