
Neotectonics of NE-striking fault zones and earthquake risk in the Yunnan-Myanmar block, southeastern margin of the Tibetan plateau




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. The Yunnan-Burma block, located in the southeast margin of the Tibetan plateau, is one of the most tectonically active regions in mainland China. Since 1900, more than 10 earthquakes with magnitude over 7 occurred in this region, which account for more than a half of the great earthquakes in Yunnan. Moreover, the recent MS7.2 earthquake occurred in Mong Hpayak on March 24, 2011, and a series of MS5.5 earthquakes in the western Yunnan. If these earthquakes are not isolated, does they mean early warning of great earthquakes in the future? Therefore, for the purpose of earthquake prevention and disaster mitigation, it is urgent and necessary to carry out seismic risk assessment in this region especially along the NE-trending fault zones. The method of tectonic geomorphology was used to analyze fault activity. By measuring the deformation of the typical geomorphic or geologic units together with dating data, fault activity was estimated. The measurement was finished indoor or in the field. Remote sensing data were interpreted and geologic maps were prepared. According to the interpretation of drainage systems based on the remote sensing data, displacement of faults were determined. In the field, the rope and scale were employed for measurement (if displacement is too long, GPS equipment was used). Using dating technology, motion rates on the faults in the study area were estimated. The analysis of tectonic geomorphology along the Nanting fault zone, and drainages and channels across the fault zone shows systematically left-lateral offset. The largest offset occurs along the Nujiang River, and total displacement of the fault here is about 10 km. Moreover, offsets of rivers near the village Datianba range from 1.5 to 5.5 km and 1.8 to 2.1 km near Panhe Farm, respectively. Besides geomorphic units, geologic units are also displaced. Granite bodies west of the Yun County show obviously sinistral slip ranging from 4.1m to 5.6 km. Based on the tectonic characteristics and deep dynamic mechanism of NE-trending tectonics within the Yunnan-Myanmar block, the following conclusions are obtained. Firstly, the maximum displacement of the NE-trending left lateral strike-slip fault zone is 10 km. According to its initial age of 5 Ma, the minimum of the left lateral strike slip rate is ca. 2 mm·a-1. Secondly, the late Cenozoic tectonic deformation and seismic activity of the Yunnan-Myanmar block are mainly controlled by the East India plate subduction, and the deformation in dominated by strike slip on faults. Thirdly, based on the analysis of the scales of NE direction left-lateral faults and recurrence times of historical earthquakes, the study region including the Nantinghe, Wanding and Dayingjiang fault zones and the surrounding areas has risk of large earthquakes of magnitude 7 or greater. More attention should be paid to earthquake prevention and risk assessment of large engineering projects in this region.


