
A Paleozoic Japan-type subduction-accretion system in the Beishan orogenic collage, southern Central Asian Orogenic Belt




 
© 2015 . Magmatic arcs ascribed to oceanic lithosphere subduction played a dominant role in the construction of the accretionary Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB). The Beishan orogenic collage, situated between the Tianshan Orogen to the west and the Inner Mongolia Orogen to the east, is a key area to understanding the subduction and accretionary processes of the southern CAOB. However, the nature of magmatic arcs in the Beishan and the correlation among different tectonic units along the southern CAOB are highly ambiguous. In order to investigate the subduction-accretion history of the Beishan and put a better spatial and temporal relationship among the tectonic belts along the southern CAOB, we carried out detailed field-based structural geology and LA-ICP-MS zircon U-Pb geochronological as well as geochemical studies along four cross-sections across crucial litho-tectonic units in the central segment of the Beishan, mainly focusing on the metamorphic assemblages and associated plutons and volcanic rocks. The results show that both the plutonic and volcanic rocks have geochemical characteristics similar to those of subduction-related rocks, which favors a volcanic arc setting. Zircons from all the plutonic rocks yield Phanerozoic ages and the plutons have crystallization ages ranging from 464. ±. 2. Ma to 398. ±. 3. Ma. Two volcanic-sedimentary rocks yield zircons with a wide age range from Phanerozoic to Precambrian with the youngest age peaks at 441. Ma and 446. Ma, estimated to be the time of formation of the volcanic rocks. These new results, combined with published data on ophiolitic mélanges from the central segment of the Beishan, favor a Japan-type subduction-accretion system in the Cambrian to Carboniferous in this part of the Paleo-Asian Ocean. The Xichangjing-Niujuanzi ophiolite probably represents a major suture zone separating different tectonic units across the Beishan orogenic collage, while the Xiaohuangshan-Jijitaizi ophiolitic mélange may represent a Carboniferous back-arc basin formed as a result of slab rollback ascribed to northward subduction of the Niujuanzi oceanic lithosphere. Subduction of this back-arc basin probably took place in the early Carboniferous, generating the widespread arc-related granitoids including adakitic plutons, and overlapping earlier arc assemblages. The Beishan orogenic collage is not the eastern extension of the Chinese Central Tianshan, but it was generated by the same north-dipping subduction system separated by the Xingxingxia transform fault, as revealed by available regional data. This contribution implies that in addition to fore-arc accretion, back-arc accretion ascribed to opening and closure of a back-arc basin may also have been a common process in the construction of the CAOB, resembling that of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic subduction-accretion system in the SW pacific.


