
Electrical structure and seismogenic environment along the border region of Yunnan, Sichuan and Guizhou in the south of the North-South seismic belt




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. The Tibetan plateau is the result of the collision of the Indian and Eurasian plates during the Cenozoic, which began circa 50 Ma. The southeastern margin of the Tibetan plateau is located between the plateau and the South China block, including most of Sichuan and Yunnan provinces and a part of Guizhou in southwest China. They have been extensively studied. Several models have been proposed to explain the deformation and uplift of the eastern Tibetan plateau. The first model is that lateral extrusion of rigid blocks created the major strike-slip faults in the region, and in the second model, ductile channel flow in the middle/lower crust causes the thickening of the crust and uplift of the plateau. The debates of these models center on whether the deformation is localized in the mantle or in the upper crust. In order to study the deep electrical structure of the southeastern margin of the Tibetan plateau, MT data along the profile L2 were collected during the period from June to September in 2011. The observation equipment was MTU-5A systems manufactured by Phoenix of Canada and LEMI-417 made in Ukraine. All five components of the time-varying electromagnetic field (Ex, Ey, Hx, Hy and Hz) were recorded at every MT site. The total length of the MT profile was about 750 km. The number of super-long period MT sites, long period MT sites and conventional MT sites was 12, 52 and 58, respectively. The average site span was approximately 7 km. Time series were continuously recorded at each site for about 20 hours in the case of conventional MT, 40 hours for long-period MT and 10~15 days for super-long-period MT experiment. The sounding frequencies of the super-long period MT site, long-period MT site and conventional MT site are 320 Hz~30000 s, 320 Hz~5000 s and 320 Hz~2000 s, respectively, which were suitable to invert the structure of the crust-uppermost mantle in the area. The remote reference MT technique and the robust data processing method were employed. The subsurface dimensionality and directionality were assessed using the Bahr tensor decomposition and phase tensors. The results of 2-D skewness show that the skewness of most sites is less than 0.3, and the part of longest periods is greater than 0.3. The electric strike of most sites is in N-S, which is basically in accordance with tectonic strike and perpendicular to the profile. The non-linear conjugate gradients (NLCG) was used in the 2D inversion. The initial models were constructed with 100 Ωm uniform half-space and an incorporating topography. Before the start of inversion, the mutual consistency between apparent resistivity and phase data were processed using the rhoplus method. According to the L-curve analysis, τ=30 was an optimal selection in final inversion. We selected the joint TE+TM mode. The error floors were set to 5% for the apparent resistivity and phase of TM, and 30% and 20% error floors were set for apparent resistivity and phase of TE, respectively. The root mean square (RMS) misfit of data was 3.24. Based on the final inversion model of the target profile, the location of main faults, boundaries and their extension to depth of the high-resistivity layer in upper mantle are inferred from the results. We analyzed and discussed the regional dynamics and structure of the seismogenic environment. The study shows that the electrical structure of crust and upper mantle along the profile is consistent with the regional tectonic structure. The distribution of high conductivity layers in crust and relief of high conductivity layers in upper mantle may reflect the property and evolution history of tectonics. The high-conductivity layers of upper crust exist in the Lanping-Simao block east of the Sichuan-Yunnan region block and west of the South China block. The high conductivity layers of lower crust are present in the west of the Sichuan-Yunnan region block. The high conductivity layer is deepest in the area nearby Panzhihua in the centre of the Sichuan-Yunnan region block. The high-conductivity layer is the shallowest in the area nearby Huize. The deep electrical structure derived from this work may provide evidence to elucidate the influence of the material channel flow of southeast of the Tibetan plateau in the Sichuan-Yunnan region block.


