
3D crustal density structure of West Yunnan and its tectonic implications




 
© 2015, Science Press. All right reserved. The crustal structure of West Yunnan is associated with the collision between the Eurasia and India plates. Though some geophysical profiles have been performed to reveal the lithospheric structure, but very few work on deep mapping of this area have been done. We study 3D crustal density disturbance of this area and present corresponding maps for the upper, middle and lower crust respectively. We apply the method called the multi-scale analysis for delineation of density disturbances of the crust at different depths. The method of regional gravity data processing have been developed by our group, combining theories based on multi-scale wavelet analysis, spectral analysis of potential fields and geophysical inversion. The multi-scale analysis contains three modules, which are spectral analysis for division of density layers, decomposition of the field by using wavelet transformation and multi-scale analysis, depth estimation and density inversion of decomposed gravity anomalies. The wavelet analysis produces wavelet details that correspond to some equivalent layers, the spectral analysis computes the depths the equivalent layers, and the inversion produces density disturbance maps on planes of different depths. Applying this method to the West Yunnan region, we obtain 4 density disturbance maps corresponding to depths 4.5 km, 7.8 km, 24.2 km and 48.6 km. The map of the upper crust shows that low density anomalies correlate with magmatic thumbs and depressions in sedimentary basins, which belong to the target-areas for sylvinite ore exploration. Three low-density zones of trending north-south occur in the lower and middle crust, corresponding to the 3 stages of terrane collisions between the Yangtze, Indu-Sino, West Burma, and India cratons. The map of the lower crust indicates that the latitude line of 26°N is a density separation line in the lower crust, as low-density area appears on its north and high-density area appears on its south. The crustal thickening and shortening caused by collision between Eurasian and India plates decrease from north to south, and turn to eliminate in the south to the line of 26°N latitude. On the density disturbance maps, the main slide-shear fault zones, including the Gaoligong, the Lancang River and Red River, are delineated by sharp density-variation zones, proving they are cut into the middle crust and probably extend down to the lower crust. The method of multi-scale analysis is a new method of regional gravity data processing and demonstrates its potential power for delineation of crustal structure and division of secondary tectonic units in the West Yunnan region, providing some new evidence for understanding the deep structure in the study area.


