
The Kemi Chromite Deposit




 
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. The Kemi stratiform chromitite deposit, hosted by an Early Proterozoic (2.44 Ga) layered intrusion, is located northeast of the town of Kemi on the coast of the Gulf of Bothnia. The chrome ore has been exploited since 1968 by the Outokumpu company, operating the only chrome mine within the European Union. The present surface section of the Kemi intrusion is lenticular in shape, being about 15 km long in a southwest-northeast direction and 0.2-2 km wide. The intrusion comprises an ultramafic lower part and a gabbroic upper part. The intrusion was tilted by tectonic movements during the Svecokarelidic orogeny to form a body dipping about 70° to the northwest. The chromitite layer, broken into several blocks, extends along the entire length of the basal part of the Kemi layered intrusion, but the thickness of the layer varies from a few centimeters at both ends of the intrusion to well over 100 m in the central part, with the average thickness being approximately 40 m in the mining area.During the Svecokarelidic orogeny, the area of the Kemi intrusion underwent lower-amphibolite facies metamorphism. The original magmatic silicates have been completely altered to secondary minerals in the lower and upper parts of the intrusion, whereas those in the center have been preserved. Alteration had a negative effect on the grade of the chrome ore. Chromite grains have nevertheless preserved their original composition in their cores, even though the silicates of the same rock have been completely altered. The altered rocks have preserved their cumulate textures fairly well, and, despite alteration, many of the primary minerals can still be recognized by means of their pseudomorphs (. Alapieti et al., 1989).The Kemi chromite mineralization was discovered in 1959 and mining commenced in 1968. The mine's current proven ore reserves total 50.1 Mt with an average grade of about 26.0% Cr2O3 and a chrome-iron ratio of 1.6-1.7. Additional mineral resources, which have been estimated to a depth of 1 km, comprise 97.8 Mt (Outokumpu, 2014). According to a geophysical seismic reflection survey by the Geological Survey of Finland, it is possible that the chromitite layer continues to the depth of 2-2.5 km or even deeper, the Kemi layered intrusion possibly extending down to about 3-4 km (Kukkonen et al., 2009).In 1968, the first closed furnace was completed at Tornio and ferrochrome production started. The ferrochrome works was expanded by two more furnaces in 1985 and 2012. The construction process of the stainless steel works was completed in 1976, and the hot rolling mill was inaugurated in 1988. This integrated and technologically advanced production chain from chrome ore to stainless steel coils and plates in the Kemi-Tornio area is unique in the world today.


