
Tectono-stratigraphic signature of a rapid multistage subsiding rift basin in the Tyrrhenian-Apennine hinge zone (Italy): A possible interaction of upper plate with subducting slab




 
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. The Campania Plain is a rapidly subsiding Quaternary basin that formed on the eastern margin of the Tyrrhenian Sea in association with the younger phase of Tyrrhenian rifting. It is located in the hinge area between the Apennines fold-thrust belt and the Tyrrhenian extensional backarc basin. By combining original stratigraphic analyses of well logs and seismic profiles we built a basin subsidence curve, mapped the fault pattern of the Campania Plain and analyzed the impact of the block faulting on the sedimentology and stratigraphic architecture of the basin fill. Well data indicate that the Quaternary succession consists of offshore, shoreface and coal-bearing coastal plain deposits arranged to form thick aggradational and retrogradational units. The sequence stratigraphy interpretation of well logs permitted us to recognize thirteen depositional sequences and the stratigraphic signatures of the rift stages. The study area corresponds to a sediment overfilled/balanced infill basin type that resulted from superposition of several rifting events characterized by high rates of basin subsidence. Taking into account the geological data of the adjacent areas, we propose a Pliocene-Quaternary rifting evolution of the upper Tyrrhenian plate consisting of four episodes. Two peculiar features of the Tyrrhenian rifting are a skip of the extensional axial zone eastwards leaving the previous zone of high strain localization (Vavilov basin), followed by a dramatic change (90°) of the direction of extension. Because these Tyrrhenian features cannot be accounted for by the current rifting models we hypothesized a link between the evolution of upper plate and subducting slab. The proposed geodynamic scenario is characterized by a progressive rupture of the subducting plate and formation of extensional basins in the upper plate.


