
Variscan terrane boundaries in the Odenwald-Spessart basement, Mid-German Crystalline Zone: New evidence from ocean ridge, intraplate and arc-derived metabasaltic rocks




 
© 2015 Elsevier B.V.. The Mid-German Crystalline Zone is part of a large Variscan suture and consists of various basement complexes that are exposed in central Germany. New lithogeochemical and Sr-Nd-Pb isotope data obtained on various amphibolites from the Odenwald-Spessart basement show that their protoliths formed in different tectonic settings and were subsequently incorporated into a subduction zone prior to Variscan continental collision.Metabasic rocks from the northernmost Spessart and the western Odenwald are geochemically almost identical and their protoliths are interpreted to have formed in an extensional, possibly, a back-arc setting. The tholeiitic and calc-alkaline rocks have intermediate TiO2 concentrations and high Th/Nb ratios, typical of volcanic arc-type and/or subduction-fluid modified rocks. The Nd initial ratios are depleted (εNd 330 Ma=5.0-5.8) and Nd model ages range from 660 to 610Ma, which points at juvenile crustal addition towards the end of the Neoproterozoic. The samples define a linear array in 206Pb/204Pb versus 207Pb/204Pb space.In contrast, the protoliths of the metabasic rocks from the southern and central Spessart formed either in an intraplate oceanic island or a continental arc setting. The alkaline intraplate rocks from the southern Spessart basement are very TiO2-rich and have very low Th/Nb ratios. The rocks have weakly depleted Nd initals (εNd 330 Ma=2.6-3.3) and Nd model ages between 870 and 810Ma. In contrast, the central Spessart within-plate rocks have considerably lower TiO2 concentrations but higher Th/Nb ratios. In addition, these rocks are isotopically enriched (εNd 330 Ma= -13.1 to -9.5) and have Palaeoproterozoic Nd model ages. The continental arc rocks from the central and southern Spessart basement have low TiO2 concentrations and variable Th/Nb ratios. Mostly negative Nd initials (εNd 330 Ma= -2.6 to +0.9) and late Mesoproterozoic Nd model ages indicate that recycling of older crust or mixing of crustal components of different age must have occurred during the formation of the continental arc precursor rocks.Retrogressed eclogites from the eastern Odenwald are tholeiitic metabasalts with chondrite-normalised flat rare earth element patterns, intermediate to high TiO2 concentrations and very low Th/Nb ratios. The least retrogressed eclogites lack negative Nb-Ta anomalies. In addition, the rocks have depleted Nd isotope compositions (εNd 360 Ma=7.1-8.5), Nd model ages of 470-425Ma, superchondritic 147Sm/144Nd ratios and 87Sr/86Sr initial ratios similar to bulk Earth. These features are consistent with the notion that the eclogite protoliths originated in a shallow, depleted mid-ocean ridge mantle and were emplaced in a mid-ocean ridge setting. During crustal emplacement, the composition of these rocks was variably modified by subduction-related fluids and/or assimilation of crustal material.The hitherto unknown differences in the composition and genesis of the various amphibolites in the southern and northern Spessart basement require revision of existing tectonostratigraphic models for the area. Instead of representing one contiguous unit, the various amphibolites are interpreted to belong to two different terranes that became juxtaposed in the Spessart-Odenwald basement. These terranes are separated by a major fault (Otzberg-Michelbach Fault Zone), along which rocks of inferred peri-Gondwana origin, now exposed in the western Odenwald and the northernmost Spessart were thrust onto probable Baltica/Avalonia-derived rocks that are exposed as a tectonic window in the eastern Odenwald and the central and southern Spessart. It is further suggested that the Otzberg-Michelbach Fault Zone is part of the lithospheric-scale Rheic Suture. The Odenwald-Spessart basement is composed of two different terranes. Northern Spessart and western Odenwald basement form a terrane. Central and southern Spessart and eastern Odenwald basement form yet another terrane. The latter is interpreted as a tectonic window.


